docs: add ibis-bench blog (#9391)
ibis-project/ibis: docs/posts/ibis-bench/index.qmd

---
title: "DuckDB, DataFusion, Polars: a benchmark"
author: "Cody Peterson"
date: "2024-06-17"
image: "figure1.png"
categories:
    - benchmark
    - duckdb
    - datafusion
    - polars
---

There are plenty of options for single-node data systems that easily beat
[pandas](https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas), the Python dataframe library Wes
McKinney created about 15 years ago, on standard benchmarks. But can they beat
[the Python dataframe library Wes created nearly 10 years
ago](https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis)? (*Spoiler alert: it's a trick
question!*)

In this post, we'll look at the big three single-node modern OLAP engines based
on [Apache Arrow](https://github.com/apache/arrow):
[DuckDB](https://github.com/duckdb/duckdb),
[DataFusion](https://github.com/apache/datafusion), and
[Polars](https://github.com/pola-rs/polars). We'll see how they compare to each
other on TPC-H queries and how [Ibis](https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis)
provides a unified API to work with all of them (and over a dozen more
backends).

## Results and analysis

> Let's delve straight into the results. There are some visualizatoins provided

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's delve straight into the results. There are some visualizations provided
```

    .when(ibis._["instance_type"] == "personal laptop", 96)
    .else_(0)
    .end()
)

instance_details = (
    t.group_by("instance_type")
    .agg()
    .mutate(
        cpu_type=cpu_type_cases, cpu_cores=cpu_num_cases, memory_gbs=memory_gb_cases
    )
).order_by("memory_gbs", "cpu_cores", "instance_type")

cpu_types = sorted(
    instance_details.distinct(on="cpu_type")["cpu_type"].to_pyarrow().to_pylist()
)

instance_details
```

### What's in the data?

With the data, we can see we ran the benchmark on scale factors:

```{python}
sfs = sorted(t.distinct(on="sf")["sf"].to_pyarrow().to_pylist())
sfs
```

:::{.callout-note title="What is a scale factor?" collapse="true"}
A scale factor is roughly the size of the data in memory in gigabytes. For
example, a scale factor of 1 means the data is roughly 1GB in memory.

Stored on disk in Parquet format, the data is smaller -- about 0.38GB for scale
factor 1 with the compression settings used in this benchmark.
:::

We can look at the total execution time by scale factor:

```{python}
#| code-fold: true
#| code-summary: "Show bar plot code"
c = px.bar(
    t.group_by("sf").agg(total_seconds=t["execution_seconds"].sum()),

>     x="sf",

Reviewer: I think this may look better if you convert the x-axis to a log base 2 scale.

Author: I didn't like it -- next time will add `sf=2` and `sf=4` and do this

Author: <img width="739" alt="image" src="https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis/assets/54814569/68bfcb79-ffea-45ae-8083-d700d7a83f98">

    y="total_seconds",
    category_orders={"sf": sfs},
    title="total execution time by scale factor",
)
c
```

We ran on the following systems:

```{python}
systems = sorted(t.distinct(on="system")["system"].to_pyarrow().to_pylist())
systems
```

:::{.callout-note title="What is a system?" collapse="true"}
For convenience in this benchmark, a 'system' is defined as a hyphen-separated
naming convention where:

- `ibis-*`: Ibis was used
    - `ibis-<backend>`: Ibis dataframe code was used with the given backend
    - `ibis-<backend>-sql`: SQL code was used via Ibis on the given backend
- `polars-*`: Polars was used
    - `polars-lazy`: Polars was used with the LazyFrames API
:::

We can look at the total execution time by system:

```{python}
#| code-fold: true
#| code-summary: "Show bar plot code"
c = px.bar(

>     t.group_by("system").agg(total_seconds=t["execution_seconds"].sum()),

Reviewer: Not entirely sure how useful this is given that polars is missing a large number of queries in some cases. If you're going to keep this I this should be removed or replaced with something else that's try to convey the point you're trying to make here.

It looks like you're using total execution time for time measurements throughout. I would suggest something that accounts for the fact that polars couldn't run most of the queries at larger scale factors on less powerful hardware.

---
title: "Ibis benchmarking: DuckDB, DataFusion, Polars"
author: "Cody Peterson"
date: "2024-06-23"
image: "figure1.png"
categories:
    - benchmark
    - duckdb
    - datafusion
    - polars
---

*The best benchmark is your own workload on your own data*.

## Key considerations

The purpose of this post is to explore some benchmarking data with Ibis. We'll

> compare a few modern query engines, explore the Ibis API as a great choice for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
compare three modern single-node query engines, explore the Ibis API as a great choice for
```

each of them, and discuss the results.

### The benchmark

:::{.callout-important title="Not an official TPC-H benchmark"}
This is not an [official TPC-H benchmark](https://www.tpc.org/tpch). We ran a
derivate of the TPC-H benchmark.
:::

[The TPC-H benchmark](https://www.tpc.org/tpch) is a benchmark for databases
and, [increasingly](https://docs.coiled.io/blog/tpch),
[dataframes](https://pola.rs/posts/benchmarks)!  It consists of 22 queries

> across 8 tables. The queries are designed to test the performance of a database
> (or dataframe!) on a variety of tasks including filtering, aggregation, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
across 8 tables. The queries are designed to test the performance of a query engine
on a variety of tasks including filtering, aggregation, and
```

Author: I disagree with this change -- TPC-H is clearly initially designed for databases, and I want to make the point (perhaps more explicitly somewhere) that Ibis brings the best of database technology including query engines to dataframes

Reviewer: Fair enough, but the parenthetical seems out of place to me here then. Why point out the parenthetical if it's specifically designed for databases? Seems distractiing.

Reviewer: This also isn't blocking.

Author: how's:

> The SQL (or dataframe) code representing the queries is
designed to test the performance of a query engine on a variety of tasks
including filtering, aggregation, and joins.

?

Reviewer: I just don't like parentheticals. What value is it adding here?

joins.  SQL queries are defined by the TPC-H benchmark. We run the SQL queries
and equivalent dataframe code via Ibis and Polars APIs.

The data for the benchmark can be generated at any scale factor, which roughly
corresponds to the size of the data in memory in gigabytes. For instance, a
scale factor of 10 would be about 10GB of data in memory.

### The engines, the API, the code

We'll use three modern single-node OLAP engines
([DuckDB](https://github.com/duckdb/duckdb),
[DataFusion](https://github.com/apache/datafusion),
[Polars](https://github.com/pola-rs/polars)) with the Ibis API via two coding
paradigms (dataframe and SQL). Ibis provides a consistent API across 20+
backends, including these three. We run [SQL
code](https://github.com/lostmygithubaccount/ibis-bench/blob/v2.0.0/src/ibis_bench/queries/sql.py)
through Ibis in addition to [dataframe
code](https://github.com/lostmygithubaccount/ibis-bench/blob/v2.0.0/src/ibis_bench/queries/ibis.py)

> to get a sense of any overhead in Ibis dataframe code. Note that Ibis dataframe
> code generates SQL for the DuckDB and DataFusion backends and generates
> dataframe code for the Polars backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to get a sense of any overhead in Ibis dataframe code.

::: {.callout-note}
## Ibis generates SQL for DuckDB and DataFusion and dataframe code for Polars.
:::
```

:::{.callout-note title="Honorable mention: chDB" collapse="true"}
[chDB](https://github.com/chdb-io/chdb) would be another great single-node OLAP
engine to benchmark. We don't because it's not currently a backend for Ibis,
though [there has been work done to make it
one](https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis/pull/8497).

If you're interested in contributing to Ibis, a new backend like chDB could be a
great project for you!
:::

9/22 queries for Ibis with the Polars backend fail from [lack of scalar subquery
support](#failing-polars-queries). Due to this and relatively experimental SQL
support in Polars, we've opted to run on [the Polars API
directly](https://github.com/lostmygithubaccount/ibis-bench/blob/v2.0.0/src/ibis_bench/queries/polars.py)
in this iteration of the benchmark. This is done with the LazyFrames API **and

> no streaming engine** (per the Polars team's recommendation, as the current

Reviewer: ```suggestion
no streaming engine** (per the Polars team's recommendation, as the current
```

Can we link to this recommendation? If so, then I think we can nix the `, as the current streaming engine is being rewritten` bit.

#### Failing queries

Queries fail for one of two reasons:

1. The query doesn't work in the given system
2. The query otherwise failed on a given run

We'll note the cases of the first below. The second is usually due to memory
pressure and [will be seen at higher scale
factors](#failing-queries-due-to-memory-pressure) throughout the data.

#### Failing DataFusion queries

Queries 16, 21, and 22 fail for the DataFusion backend via Ibis dataframe code,
and query 16 fails through SQL. Note that [all TPC-H SQL queries successfully
run through DataFusion
directly](https://github.com/apache/datafusion-benchmarks) -- Ibis generates SQL
that [hits a bug with DataFusion that has already been
fixed](https://github.com/apache/datafusion/issues/10830).  We expect these
queries to work in the next iteration of this benchmark coming soon.

#### Failing Polars queries

Queries 11, 13-17, and 20-22 fail for the Polars backend via Ibis dataframe
code. These all fail due to lack of scalar subquery support in the backend. I've
[opened an issue](https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis/issues/9422) for tracking
and discussion.

:::{.callout-tip title="Interested in contributing?"}

> Interesting in contributing to Ibis? Increasing coverage of operations for a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Increasing coverage of operations for a
```

Since you've already asked the question in the title.

backend is a great place to start!
:::

### How queries are written

See [the source
code](https://github.com/lostmygithubaccount/ibis-bench/tree/v2.0.0/src/ibis_bench/queries)
for the exact queries used in this iteration of the benchmark. Polars recently
updated their TPC-H queries, so the next iteration of this benchmark would use
those.

Queries were adapted from [Ibis TPC-H
queries](https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis/tree/main/ibis/backends/tests/tpch)
and [Polars TPC-H queries](https://github.com/pola-rs/tpch). The first 10 Ibis
dataframe queries were translated from the Polars dataframe queries, while the

> rest were directly adapted from the Ibis repository. The SQL strings were

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rest were directly adapted from the Ibis repository. The SQL strings were
```

This could link to our test directory if you wanted, but not necessary.

Author: it is linked above

adapted from the Ibis repository.

### How queries are run

See [the source
code](https://github.com/lostmygithubaccount/ibis-bench/tree/v2.0.0) and
[methodology](https://ibis-bench.streamlit.app/methodology) for more details. In
short:

- data is generated as a Parquet file per table

>     - standard DuckDB Parquet writer is used (snappy compression, ~100k row
>      group size, etc.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - the default DuckDB Parquet writer is used
```

Probably not great to use `etc` when discussing how things are run due to its inherent lack of specificity 😅

    - data is always downloaded onto a compute instance (no cloud storage reads)
- decimal types are converted to floats after reading

>     - this is done to avoid several issues experienced

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - works around several issues
```

    - in the next iteration of this benchmark, we'll use the `decimal` type
- each query is run three times per configuration (system, scale factor, instance type)
- we measure the time to write the results of the query to a Parquet file
    - this includes reading the Parquet file(s) and executing the query

### Biases

My name is Cody and I'm a Senior Technical Product Manager at [Voltron
Data](https://voltrondata.com). I am a contributor to the Ibis project and
employed to work on it -- I'm biased in favor of Ibis and the composable data
ecosystem.

Ibis is [an independently governed open source
project](https://github.com/ibis-project/governance) that **is not owned by

> Voltron Data**, though several steering committee members are employed by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Voltron Data**, though several steering committee members are employed by
```

Linking to governance repo might be nice here, but not necessary.

Author: it is linked above

Reviewer: I guess I can't read today!

checking for the success of the query in any of the three runs per
configuration.
:::

## Discussion and reproducibility

Benchmarking is fraught: it's easy to get wrong and ship your bias in the
results. We don't want to end up as [Figure 1 in "Fair Benchmarking Considered
Difficult: Common Pitfalls In Database Performance
Testing"](https://hannes.muehleisen.org/publications/DBTEST2018-performance-testing.pdf):

![Figure 1](figure1.png)

If you have any questions or concerns, feel free to [open an
issue](https://github.com/lostmygithubaccount/ibis-bench/issues/new) or comment
on this post below.

### Which system is best?

Trick question! It depends on your use case. DuckDB is a simple, performant
in-process database with an on-disk file format (SQLite for OLAP). DataFusion is
an extensible query engine and is often used for building databases or query
engines. Polars is an OLAP query engine with a Python dataframe API that can be
used as a more performant alternative to pandas.

All three make great Ibis backends and you can switch between them in a single
line of code. This let's you write your code once and run it on the engine

> that's best for your use case. If you newer, better engine comes along you'll

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that's best for your use case. If a better engine comes along you'll
```

likely be able to use that too. And you can scale up and out across the 20+
backends Ibis supports as needed.

TPC-H is a decent benchmark *for what it benchmarks, which is limited*. We're
not running window functions, doing timeseries analysis, or feature engineering
for machine learning. We're not using nested data types. We're not performing
regexes or using LLMs in UDFs...

It's easy to summarize and visualize benchmarking data in a way that favors a

> given system. You should favor the system that works best for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
given system. You should favor the system that works best for your use case.
```

---
title: "DuckDB, DataFusion, Polars: a benchmark"
author: "Cody Peterson"
date: "2024-06-17"
image: "figure1.png"
categories:
    - benchmark
    - duckdb
    - datafusion
    - polars
---

There are plenty of options for single-node data systems that easily beat
[pandas](https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas), the Python dataframe library Wes
McKinney created about 15 years ago, on standard benchmarks. But can they beat
[the Python dataframe library Wes created nearly 10 years
ago](https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis)? (*Spoiler alert: it's a trick
question!*)

> In this post, we'll look at the big three single-node modern OLAP engines based

Reviewer 2: Another good phrasing:

"built on or highly interoperable with Arrow"

- data is generated as a Parquet file per table
    - standard DuckDB Parquet writer is used (snappy compression, ~100k row
     group size, etc.)
    - data is always downloaded onto a compute instance (no cloud storage reads)
- decimal types are converted to floats after reading
    - this is done to avoid several issues experienced
- Polars is run with the lazy API and without the streaming engine
    - this is per recommendation of the Polars team
    - the streaming engine is being rewritten and should improve out-of-core
     performance
- all queries were run three times per configuration

If you have any questions or concerns, feel free to [open an
issue](https://github.com/lostmygithubaccount/ibis-bench/issues/new) or comment
on this blog below.

### My background and biases

We'll switch to singular pronouns for this section: my name is Cody and I'm a
Senior Technical Product Manager at Voltron Data to work on the Ibis project.
Voltron Data is a venture-backed series A startup that supports several open
source projects (namely Apache Arrow, Ibis, and Substrait), provides commercial
support for these projects, and offers a distributed GPU-accelerated query

> engine named Theseus.

Author: good catch, thanks!
